# Chapter 2: C++ Language Elements

## Primatives
    IN VIDEO: Primitive Language Data Types
There are many different data types that are sorted into a few main categories

* Character Types:
    * char: size of 1 byte or 8 bits
    * char16_t: size of atleast 16 bits but not smaller then char
    * char32_t: size of atleast 32 bits but not smaller then char16_t
    * wchar_t: Supports the largest char types including Japanese and Chinese characters

* Integral Types:
    * short int: size of atleast 8 bits. Is often 16 bits.
    * int: size of atleast 16 bits. Not smaller then short.
    * long int: size of atleast 32 bits. Not smaller then int
    * long long int: size of atleast 64 bits. Not smaller then long.

    NOTE: Integral types can be either signed or unsigned. Where signed can have both positive and negative values while unsigned can only have positive values. We can store larger maximum number in the unsigned integral types as compared to it's respective signed types because we do not need to store negative numbers. 

* Floating Point Types:
    * float: Basic floating number number
    * double: Is no smaller then float
    * long double: is no smaller then double.

* Boolean Types

<!-- -->

When converting between types it is important to realise that if we are converting from larger bit types to a smaller bit type of the same type then we may truncate the values. Therefore long -> int conversion is not reccomended.

Here are some examples: 
* Safe Type Conversions:
    * short -> int -> long
    * float -> double -> long double
* Unsafe Type Conversions:
    * long -> int -> short
    * long double -> double -> float

<!-- -->

Also when converting between from float to an int, everything to the right of the decimal point will be truncated.

## Variables
    IN VIDEO: Using Variables
Can be declared and initialised. If they are declared but not initialised the vale is whatever is in the memory space that the address is pointing to. So for example:

```c++
int i;
std::cout << i << std::endl;
\\value of i is 345987
```

Therefore it is recommended to declare and initialise the variables as close to the point of use as possible.

`int i = 23;`

Mutable variables can have their values change throughout the life of the application while immutable variables when set cannot be changed.
Variables are mutable by default. To make them immutable there are two ways of doing this:

1. Using `constexpr`: e.g. `constexpr auto i = 53`;
2. Using `const` keyword: e.g. `const int i = current_month();` OR int `const i = current_month();` 

constexpr sets the value at compile time. So we only use the first method if we know the value during compile time, and the value will not be changed afterwards. The second way is more useful if we do not have the value at compile time and need to calculate and set the value during runtime, but once set we should not change it.

## Operators
    IN VIDEO: Introduction to Operators and Operator Precedence

#### Mathematical Operators:
Operators go from left to right with some such as Multiplication and Division have precedence over others like Addition and Subtraction.

* a+b: Adds a to b
* ++a: Pre-increment, increments a by 1
* a++: Post-increment, increments a by 1
* a-b:
* a/b:
* a*b:
* a%b:

#### Comparison operators:
* a==b:
* a!=b:
* a<b:
* a>b:
* a<=b:
* a>=b:

## Control Flow
    IN VIDEO: Introduction to Control Flow, Part 1

#### If Else Statements:
e.g.  
```c++
if (x < 7 &&   
    x % 2 ==1) {  
    std::cout << "Number is less then 7 and is odd" << std::endl  
} else if (x < 7) {  
    std::cout << "Number is less then 7 but is even" << std::endl;  
} else {  
    std::cout << "Number is greater then 7" << std::endl;  
}
```

#### Logical Operators:
* `&&`: AND operator
* `||`: OR operator
* `!`: NOT Operator

#### (Traditional) For Loop:
```c++
for (init; test; incr/decr) {`  
    std::cout << "Do Something" << std::endl; 
}
```
Initialize the variable and increment/decrement, after each loop check the test with the variable to see if it fails. End the loop once the test fails.

    IN VIDEO: Introduction to Control Flow, Part 2
#### While Loop:
```c++
while (<predicate>) {
    //loop body
}
```
Checks the test condition initially and then after every loop. It will keep looping until the test fails, at which point it will end. We must make sure that the test will eventually fail otherwise we will get an infinate loop.

#### Do-While Loop:
```c++
do {
    //MUST contain a loop body
} while (<predicate>); //There is a semicolon after the while, which is not present in a normal while loop
```

The Loop is run once before we check to see if the test has failed. We keep looping until the test fails.

#### Switchcase Statements:
```c++
switch( <char | int> ) {
    case <char | int>:
        // If we do not have a break statement within a case then we 'fall-through' to the next one. 
    case <char | int>:
        // Can only test for a char or init in the case statements
        break;
    default: 
        // Switchcase statements MUST have a default statement
        break;
}
```

## Statements & Expressions
    IN VIDEO: Statements and Expressions
#### Statements
There are many different kinds of statements, here are some mentioned in the standard:

* Compound statements: Are within a block i.e. 
```c++
{
    statement1;
    statement2;
}
```
* If statements
* Loop statements: which include while loops, for loops and do loops
* Declarative statements: Used to create new variables, which can be initialised later.

#### Expressions
According to the standard these are statements that do computation. Expressions have side effects and may change the value These include: 
* Arithematic Operators
* Unary Statements, like ++, --, !
* Type Statements
* Postfix operators, like subscript (arrayIndex) e.g. array**[1]**, or function call


**Difference between Expression and Statements is that Expressions have a value while Statements do not, so generally if you can pass it as an argument to a function then it is an Expression otherwise it is a Statement. In functional languages where you can pass everything, everything can be an Expression**

#### L-Values and R-Values
L.H.S = R.H.S

Left Hand Side (L.H.S): Statement to the left of the operator is known as the **L-Value**.    
Right Hand Side (R.H.S): Statement to the right of the operator is known as the **R-Value**

#### Comments
There are two ways to comment:
* Single line comment: `// Here is a single line comment`
* Multiline comment: `/* Here is a multiline comment */`. One thing to note is that we cannot have nested multiline comments.

These are some of the best practices of commenting:
* DO's:
    * Document WHY in your code
    * Provide a clear explanation of the intent of code
    * Keep comments up-to-date
    * If code needs explaining it could be simpler
    * Use a consistant coding format, inconsistant comments can lead to confusion
* DON'Ts:
    * Avoid stating WHAT you are doing
    * Avoid stating HOW you are doing it
    * Avoid gratuitious comments
    * Avoid obfuscating code with too much comments
    * Avoid nesting different types of comments

## Including files
    IN VIDEO: Using Include Files with Multiple Files

To use functions and variables declared in other files in our current file, we need to include them. Here is an example:
`#include <iostream>`
This tells the compiler to go to the *system include path* (indicated by the less-than symbols`<`/greater-than`>`, and may point to for example */usr/local/gcc-5.1.0/include/c++/5.1.0*/iostream) and get the definations from the iostream file. What is in this file are function declarations with no body. The reason we would want to do this is so that we have an interface to program against knowing that the actual defination will be provided at the time of compile. Since these files may be included multiple times to make sure that we do not pollute the global namespace of our application we use **include guards**. This means that we will not have multiple multiple definations of the same symbol. Include guards wrap the content of the header file with a name and a test, and will not include the contents if the name is already defined. So if we include the same header file twice by mistake in the ssame translation unit (i.e. .cpp file) then we will not get an error. Here is an example:
```c++
//geometry.h

#ifndef GEOMETRY_H_
#define GEOMETRY_H_

double calc_area_of_circle(double radius);

#endif //GEOMETRY_H_
```

This will prevent multiple declarations of `calc_area_of_circle`.    
    

If we want to include a file that is not in the system include path but in a custom directory we use double quotation marks. This is called the *user include path*. Here is an example: 
`#include "geometry.h"`. We can use both absolute and relative paths to the file. But this is not recommended as both these ways assume knowledge about the filesystem and the location of the various files. The recommended way is to instead feed the path to the files to be included to the compiler during compile time by using a `-I` flag. For example assuming that
* Our project is in the path: */home/jsyed/projects/hello*
* Our include files are on the path: */home/jsyed/projects/hello/incl*
* Include file: *hello.h*
* We have a *main.cpp* file which includes the *hello.h* file: `#include "hello.h"`
* Then we can use the following command to compile the file: 
```bash
g++ -o program_name main.cpp hello.cpp -I /home/jsyed/projects/hello/incl -std=c++11
```
