# Chapter 4: Functions

## General Structure of a Function Defination

    IN VIDEO: A Function Primer
Here is how a function is supposed to be defined according to the C++ Standard:

```
<return type or void> function_name( <zero or more parameters>) {
    <function body>
}
```

## Defining a function

    IN VIDEO: A Function Primer

Now there are two ways that we can define a function:
1. .hpp file 
```c++
//temp_converter.hpp

#ifndef TEMP_CONVERTER_HPP
#define TEMP_CONVERTER_HPP

inline
double celsius_to_farenheit(double temp) {
    return (temp * 9/5) + 32;
}

#endif //TEMP_CONVERTER_HPP
```

2. .h/.cpp file
```c++
//temp_converter.h

#ifndef TEMP_CONVERTER_H
#define TEMP_CONVERTER_H

double celsius_to_farenheit(double);

#endif //TEMP_CONVERTER_H
```

```c++
//temp_converter.cpp

double celsius_to_farenheit(double temp) {
    return (temp * 9/5) + 32;
}
```


## Overloading and wrapping functions

    IN VIDEO: A Function Primer
Functions can be overloaded so we can have multiple functions with the same name but have different number of parameters or different types of parameters. If the are the same we will get a `multiply defined symbol error`. It can do this because of a process called name mangling where it uses a unique function name that is turned into an address for the linker to link to by combining the function name and the types of the arguments.  
We can also wrap functions within other functions.

## Auto Keyword

    IN VIDEO: A Function Primer
One feature that is used for metaprogramming and generic programming amongst others was introduced in C++11. It is the `auto` keyword. We can use it when we do not know the return type, during (runtime / compiletime???) we will figure out what the return type is and put it there. It does this by using a specifer called `decaltype` that takes either an argument or an expression, checks its type and the puts it in place of the `auto`. Here is an example:
```c++
auto celsius_to_farenheit(double temp) -> 
    decaltype( (temp * 9/5) + 32 ) {
        return (temp * 9/5) + 32;
    }
```

## Default Arguments

    IN VIDEO: A Function Primer
E.g. 
```c++
double area_of_rectangle(double len, double width = 5) {
    return len * width;
}
```

## Memory Model 

    IN VIDEO: Function Scope
This is how the memory model looks like of a C++ application in OSX/Linux systems. Windows is similar: 

| Application map in memory |
-----------------------------
| Kernel                    |
| Stack                     |
| Heap                      |
| Heap                      |
| Heap                      |
| BSS segment               |
| Data segment              |
| Text segment              |

There is generally 1GB allocated to the kernel. While 3GB to the rest (i.e. userspace). The Stack goes from top to bottom, i.e. growing downwards towards the Heap. While the Heap fills from bottom to top, i.e. growing upwards towards the Stack. The reason the heap is much larger then the stack is because it is long term memory, perhaps even the whole life of the app. The stack is more short term. So when we define a variable with in a function, it is stored in the stack. This is why these variables cannot be used outside the function. Also once we exit the function it will automatically deallocate the variable from the stack in memory. This is why we don't have to do it manually. This is known as **Stack-Based Memory Allocation**. Memory Allocation in the Stack is handled automatically for us, while we would need to handle memory allocation for the Heap.

## Best Practices

    IN VIDEO: Unit Testing Functions
    IN VIDEO: Function Best Practices
1. Prefer clear and intention revealing names.
2. One defination Rule: Prefer functions with a single responsibility principle. Every function should do only one thing. 
3. Unit test your functions. Subtasks (which should be seperate functions) need to be tested seperately.
4. Low Coupling: So everytime the API changes there is not a massive ripple effect, of changes that need to be made in the client. Therefore use a small number of parameters as possible.
5. High Cohesion: Similar to single responsibilty principle. Make sure that each line of code is highly correlated to the purpose of the function.
6. Consistant level of Abstraction: For example we could have an "aggregate function" that calls a bunch of other functions. Therefore the level of abstraction is consistant. And each of the subtask functions could be doing the actual computation so each of those functions have a consistant level of abstraction.
