# Chapter 2: Expressions and Statements

    IN VIDEO: Don't Define A (C-Style) Variadic Function 
    (ES.40 in CppCoreGuidelines)

Problems with C-Style Variadic Functions
* They don't respect the C++ Type System.
* Details are implemented with macros
* Types are forced without any compile or runtime checking
* Argument length is unchecked

Here is an example of variadic functions and then we use it:
```c++
void PrintStrings(int n, ...) {
    va_list vl;
    va_start(vl, n);
    for (int i=0; i < n; i++) {
        const char *val = va_arg(vl, const char *);
        printf(" [%s]", val);
    }
    va_end(vl);
    printf("\n");
}

int main() {
    PrintStrings(3, "a", "b", "c"); //Prints: [a] [b] [c]
    // No compile time warning for the next two
    PrintStrings(4, "a", "b", "c"); //Prints: [a] [b] [c] []
    PrintStrings(4, "a", "b", "c", 5); //Segumentation Fault expected string not char
}
```

Therefore it is best to use C++ Variadic Template Functions instead. 
* They work with C++ type system
* Compile time type and length checked
* Therefore they are safer and may also be more runtime efficient
* Use tools available: runtime sanitizers and cppcheck

```c++
void print() {

}

template<typename First, typename ... T>
void print(First&& f, T&& ... t) {
    std::cout << " [" << f << ']';
    print(t...);
}

template<typename ... T>
void printValues(T&& ... t) {
    print(std::forward<T>(t)...);
    std::cout << std::endl;
}

int main() {
    printValues("a", "b", "c"); //Prints: [a] [b] [c]
    printValues("a", "b", "c", 5, 6.1); //Prints: [a] [b] [c] [5] [6.1]
}
```

Another way to do the code above is to use `initializer_list`. ie:
```c++
// less overhead on compiler to generate this code when compared to the 
// previous way
template<typename T>
void print(const T &t) {
    std::cout << " [" << t << ']';
}

template<typename ... T>
void printValues(const T & ... t) {
    (void)std::intializer_list<int>{(print(t), 0)...}
    std::cout << '\n';
}

int main() {
    printValues(3.14159, 2.71828, 5, "hello", "world");
}
```

    IN VIDEO: Prefer A Range-Based For Loop when Possible
    (ES.71 in CppCoreGuidelines)

**There are problems with Traditional loops:**
* They are too verbose, i.e:
    ```c++
    for (auto itr = vec1.begin();
        itr != vec1.end();
        ++itr) {
            //do something
    }
    ```

* They may be slower although it is unlikely with modern compilers. For example:
    ```c++
    for (auto itr = vec1.begin();
        itr != vec1.end(); //compilers may calculate vec1.end() everytime
        ++itr) {
            //do something
    }
    ```

* They may introduce subtle errors. For example:
    ```c++
    for (auto itr = vec1.begin();
        itr != vec2.end(); 
        ++itr) {
            // infinate loop as we will never reach end of vec2 as we are 
            // iterating over vec1. Not caught by visual studio static 
            // analysis tools or cppcheck
    }
    ```

* Finally they also have more syntax overhead, for example: 
    ```c++
    for (auto itr = vec1.begin();
        itr != vec1.end(); 
        ++itr) {
            // to interact with the value, we must dereference itr first
            // i.e. with either *itr or itr->
    }
    ```

**Range based loops solve all of these problems:**
Here is it's general form:
```c++
for (range_declaration : range_expression) 
    loop_state
```

And here is an example
```c++
for (const auto &i : vec1) {
    // do something with i
    // i does not have to be dereferenced
}
```

* They are more flexible
    ```c++
    for (const auto &c : "hello world") {
        std::cout << int(c) << '\n';
    }
    ```

* However when we are working with partial ranges and we don't have to loop over the whole range then these kinds of loops don't work that well.
    ```c++
    for (auto itr = vec1.cbegin() + 1; 
        itr != vec1.cend(); 
        ++itr) {
            // we don't want to start at begin but from begin+1
            // do something with itr
    }
    ```

* They will also not work if we need to know the index of the element in the vector as we are iterating through it.

* We should prefer auto for our range declaration, to avoid unnecessary type conversion.
    ```c++
    for (const BaseClass b : vec_of_derived) {
    // in each iteration a costly slice operation will be performed where a copy will be made and information will be lost
    }
    ```

* Use tools: clang-modernize can update 'old' loops to range-based loops

<!-- -->

    IN VIDEO: Know the Standard Library 
    ( SL.2, SL.11 in CppCoreGuidelines )

**Containers:**
* Standard Library provides containers for many different scenarios
    - array
    - vector 
        + Vector should be default selection
        + Best general purpose performance by keeping data in contigious memory
        + Efficient random access
        + Measure and test before choosing any other non-associative container
    - deque  
        + double ended queue
    - list/forward_list 
        + Linked list
    - unordered_-multi-set 
        + associative container with guarantee that element exists only once
    - unordered_-multi-map 
        + associative container with way of referencing a key-value pair
    - stack 
        + Container Adapter: can be used with any of the other containers and can give specific interface
    - queue 
        + Container Adapter: can be used with any of the other containers and can give specific interface
    - priority_queue 
        + Container Adapter: can be used with any of the other containers and can give specific interface
* Each has different memory and complexity guarantees
* They are well proven and tested
* Implementing your own that is 100% correct is very difficult, this has to do with a variety of issues with initialization of objects in the containers and exception, safty and guarantees.

**Algorithms:**
* Many different algorithms, for a lot of scenarios. Operate over the containers.
    - *_of
    - for_each
    - count_*
    - \*find\*
    - equal
    - search*
    - copy*
    - *_bound
    - set_*
    - *heap
    - \*min\*
    - \*max\*
    - \*permutation\*
    - \*sort\*
    - ...
* Highly optimized, proven, composable operations on pairs of iterators
* Understanding  them is critical to operating efficiently and succinctly with standard containers 
<!-- -->
    
    ```c++
    //for example the following algorithm
    bool found = false;
    for (const auto &elem : vec1) {
        if (elem > 10) {
            found = true;
            break;
        }
    }

    // can be re-written more succintly and efficiently as follows using stl 
    // and C++ lambdas
    const bool found = std::any_of(std::begin(vec1), std::end(vec1), [](int i) { return i > 10; });
    ```

**More info:**
* [Bjarne Stroustrup: Why you should avoid Linked Lists](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQs6IC-vgmo)
* [Sean Parent: C++ Seasoning](https://channel9.msdn.com/Events/GoingNative/2013/Cpp-Seasoning)

<!-- -->

    IN VIDEO: Don't depend on Order of Evaluation of Function Arguments
    ( ES.44 in CppCoreGuidelines )

For example: 
```c++
void print(const string &s1, const string &s2) {
    std::cout << " s1: " << s1 << " s2: " << s2;
}

int main() {
    vector<string> vec{ "a", "b"};
    size_t i = 0;
    print_values(vec[i], vec[++i]);
}

//output MSVC: "s1: b, s2: b"
//output GCC: "s1: b, s2: b"
//output CLang: " s1: a, s2: b"
//Although both CLang and GCC generate warnings
```

This is because according to the *C++ language Standard 8.3.6*, "The order of evaluation of function arguments is unspecified". Therefore it may differ between compilers. be careful as these types of errors can be non-obvious and hard to spot.

    IN VIDEO: Avoid Casting 
    ( ES.48, ES.49, Es.50 in CppCoreGuidelines )

**Explicit Conversions:**
* Dynamic Cast: `dynamic_cast<type>(obj);`
    - Can be used to cast up/down/accross polymorphic types i.e. accross inheritance heirarchy.
    - Checked during *compile time* to see if you are using polymorphic type and that cast seems reasonable. Since not always possible to know during compile time the type of object we are casting also do a *runtime* check.
    - Using dynamic_cast is often considered a design fault and it is probably better to use virtual function call in these cases.
    - Best if avoided, but is still least risky cast because of compile time and runtime checks.
* Static Cast: `static_cast<type>(obj);`
    - Can be used to apply both explicit and implicit conversions. So if any two types are convertable between each other then static_cast can be used to initiate that conversion. 
    - Can be unintentionally used to slice objects. (Slicing occurs when you construct a base type object from a derived type object. And this can happen because the base class copy constructor is a match for taking a parameter of a derived type)
    - Does not have runtime overhead of dynamic_cast. So if we are casting up from a derived type to a base type we can safely use static_cast. But if we are not careful to use a reference or pointer type in the static_cast call then we can incur this unintential slicing mentioned earlier.
    - Will sometimes have to be used e.g. explicitly tell the compiler what to do and to avoid warnings like warnings between signed and unsigned operations and loss of precision warnings. But if we encounter this then we may not be using the best type for the situation.
    - Best if avoided
* Const Cast: `const_cast<type>(obj)`
    - Can be used to remove `const` and `volatile`
    - has some legitimate uses
    - Should probably only be used when calling non-const correct APIs e.g. when calling an old c library from c++ like for example operating systems APIs which may not be const correct so if we have a c++ object that is declared cosnt and we have to pass it to the library which will not modify the object we can use const_cast to cast away const in this case. Important to note that if we const_cast away the const and then modify the data then this is undefined behavior, the compiler may do different things.
    - Avoid unless absolutely necessary.
* Reinterpret Cast: `reinterpret_cast<type>(obj);`
    - Can be used to convert almost anything to almost anything else. This is highly dangerous and can easily lead to things like memory violations.
    - Should always avoid
* Function-Style Cast: `type(obj);`
    - An old c-style cast syntax. 
    - Acceptable for calling constructors and converting between builtin types e.g. `char(13);`
    - Can be abused to be as bad as c-style casts
* C-Style Cast: '(type)obj;'
    - An old c-style cast syntax like above. But should never be used.

We should avoid using all casts and we can use tools such as `-Wold-style-cast` for GCC/CLang to help us.
