# Chapter 6: Resource Management, Part 3 (cont.)

## IN VIDEO: Don't pass smart pointers unless you need to convey ownership (R.30, R.32, R.33, R.34, R.35, R.36 in CppCoreGuidelines)

There are 5 different ways we can pass smart pointers as parameters:
* Use
* May share
* Share
* Reseat
* Take

In all of these we should:
* Prefer & and * parameters
* Prefer & for values that cannot be null
* Prefer const
* Only pass pointers if you have a reason to
* Use the tools available: C++ Core Checkers may be able to detect smart pointer abuses.


## IN VIDEO: Avoid copying of shared_ptr object

Copying a shared object causes the following steps to be taken:
* Instantiates new `shared_ptr` object, sharing in ownership
* Atomic increment of reference count
* When the copy is popped from the stack the `shared_ptr` must be destructed and an Atomic decrement of reference count occurs
* Atomic operations may be slow because based on the implementation they may cause the cpu to pause for a moment to make sure that all of the cores of the cpu are sharing the same value.
* Check to see if reference count == 0, and then object's destructor needs to be called and the object deallocated.


Alternatives to passing `shared_ptr` by copy are:
* Passing holding references(T&), reference wrappers(reference_wrapper<T>), raw pointers(T*)
* Example: Consider making a vector of * if you need to manipulate a vector of `shared_ptr` objects.

We should also try to avoid accidental copies:
```c++
//Becauseshared_ptr in the defination of the function do_something expects a 
//const int but we pass it an int, it makes a copy that we may not be aware of.
//Therefore a temporary shared_ptr<const int> is constructed on the stack, 
//incurring the cost of copying a shared_ptr.

void do_something(const std::shared_ptr<const int> &);

int main() {
    const auto p = std::make_shared<int>(5);
    do_something(p);
}
```

Therefore we should:
* Avoid copying `std::shared_ptr`
* never pass smart pointers unless you need to convey ownership
* Watch for unexpected copies
* Simple benchmark shows significant (possible up to 1,000,000 times) overhead of copying a `shared_ptr` vs a simple reference or pointer passing.


## Do not pass a pointer or a reference obtained from an aliased smart pointer (R.37 in CppCoreGuidelines)

In Summary:
* It is still possible to have memory errors when smart pointers are used
* Take a copy of the smart pointer (or value) if it's possible for the pointer to be reseated
* Use the tools available: address sanitizers

## Use Standard C++ Containers when interacting with C APIs

In Summary:
* Question every use of `malloc` or `new` even when interacting with legacy C code.
* Consider the appropriate container to replace the buffer being used.
* Remember that manually managing string terminators can be problematic.
