# Chapter 2: C++ Language Elements

## Primatives
    IN VIDEO: Primitive Language Data Types
There are many different data types that are sorted into a few main categories

* Character Types:
    * char: size of 1 byte or 8 bits
    * char16_t: size of atleast 16 bits but not smaller then char
    * char32_t: size of atleast 32 bits but not smaller then char16_t
    * wchar_t: Supports the largest char types including Japanese and Chinese characters

* Integral Types:
    * short int: size of atleast 8 bits. Is often 16 bits.
    * int: size of atleast 16 bits. Not smaller then short.
    * long int: size of atleast 32 bits. Not smaller then int
    * long long int: size of atleast 64 bits. Not smaller then long.

    NOTE: Integral types can be either signed or unsigned. Where signed can have both positive and negative values while unsigned can only have positive values. We can store larger maximum number in the unsigned integral types as compared to it's respective signed types because we do not need to store negative numbers. 

* Floating Point Types:
    * float: Basic floating number number
    * double: Is no smaller then float
    * long double: is no smaller then double.

* Boolean Types

<!-- -->

When converting between types it is important to realise that if we are converting from larger bit types to a smaller bit type of the same type then we may truncate the values. Therefore long -> int conversion is not reccomended.

Here are some examples: 
* Safe Type Conversions:
    * short -> int -> long
    * float -> double -> long double
* Unsafe Type Conversions:
    * long -> int -> short
    * long double -> double -> float

<!-- -->

Also when converting between from float to an int, everything to the right of the decimal point will be truncated.
