# Testing C++ Programs

## Keywords
    IN VIDEO: Introduction to Testing
#### using
Is derived from `typedef` keyword in C. In C++ it is called `using` and is a lot more powerful and flexible.It provides type aliases for our functions, variables etc. E.g.    
`using f2c = farenheit_to_celsius;`, where farenheit_to_celsius is a function  
`using amount = total_amount_in_bank`, where total_amount_in_bank is int 

#### inline
The inline keyword is like a compiler hint and somewhat like a linker directive, which tells the compiler to put the contents of the defination directly into the location that it is being called. This only makes sense on header files where we are declaring and defining the functions, as these header files may be included in multiple translation units (i.e. .cpp files). So now when we include the header file in different .cpp files in an application and use the same function it will not result in multiple definations of the symbol/function.    

Each translation unit (i.e. .cpp file) is processed separately and goes through the same conditional. Translation units won't share the preprocessor definitions encountered by other translation units. This means that all the translation units that will process that header will include a definition for that function. Of course, the linker will then complain that the same function has multiple definitions, hence the inline keyword.    
E.g. 
```c++
//temp_converter.hpp
#ifndef TEMP_CONVERTER_HPP_
#define TEMP_CONVERTER_HPP_
    
/*
    We have an option to create either a header file with the complete definations like this example. Or we can create a header file with just the function declarations, and then a .cpp file with the function definations.
*/

inline
int celsius_to_farenheit(double c) {
    return (c * 9/5) + 32;
}

#endif //TEMP_CONVERTER_HPP_
```

## Types of Testing
    IN VIDEO: Introduction to Testing
Here are some types of testing:
* Unit Tests: test a particular module, component, function, struct, class etc.
* Integration Tests: tests a "boundry" of the system (it's integrated modules), so for example if we are using the `<cmath>` module, we test to see if that is working properly by passing values and checking the results. 
* Functional Tests: Does not test the internal but tests the application against the System Specifications, to see if the features have met the functional requirements.
* System Tests: Is a blackbox test of the entire system, to see if they all work well together. Tests the entire system against the entire system's requirements. 
* End-to-End Tests: Very similar to System Tests, treats the current enviroment as the "live" production enviroment, and tests with regards to that.
* Acceptance Tests: Done by the customer to verify the software meets their requirements.


## Unit Testing
    IN VIDEO: Introduction To Testing
The test functions start with `test_` by convention. They also do not return anything, hence the `void`.
E.g. 
```c++
#include "temp_converter.hpp"
using c2f = celsius_to_farenheit;

void test_celsius_to_farenheit(double c) {
    ASSERT_TRUE( c2f(15) == 59.0 );
}
```

#### Unit Test Libraries
    IN VIDEO: Introduction to libunittest Testing
    IN VIDEO: Introduction to UnitTest++ Testing
    IN VIDEO: Introduction to Google Test
* libunittest
* UnitTest++
* Google Test