# Chapter 5: Pointers, Arrays and References

## Why Pointers

    IN VIDEO: C++ And Memory
Since we already know that the Heap is much larger then the Stack, and the whole userspace is around 3GB. It may make sense if the size of what we are passing is for example 500MB to use pointers, since variables, return variables and parameters are stored in the stack. Since a pointer is just an address to the heap, storing it in the Stack wouldn't take 500MB, but be very very small.

## Operators

    IN VIDEO: C++ Pointers
1. `*` unary reference operator in the LHS indicates the value to be assigned, must be an address. E.g. `int *i = &a;` or `int* i = &a;` or `int * i = &a;`. I.E. The position of `*` doesn't matter
2. `&` unary address-of operator in the RHS indicates the address in the memory where the value is located that the variable is pointing to.
3. `*` unary dereference operator can be either in the LHS or the RHS. In the LHS it allows us to change the value of the variable. I.E. `*i = 5;`.  
In the RHS it allows us to get the actual value that the pointer is pointing to I.E. `int j = *i;`

## Arrays

    IN VIDEO: C++ Pointers
Arrays are special and treated completely differently from reguler pointers. For one we do not have to dereference an array to access it's values. And If we do dereference it then we will get the first element back. As the pointer always points to the first element of the array.

## Allocating and Deallocating Memory

    IN VIDEO: Allocating and Deallocating Memory

### Primitive Pointers Allocation and Deallocation

Instead of using the following method to allocate and initialize a pointer for primitives:
```c++
int a = 5;
int *i = &a;
```
 we can use the `new` keyword like this:
 ```c++
 //allocation and initializing an int
 int *i = new int(5);
 ```

 We can then deallocate the memory by using the `delete`:
 ```c++ 
 //deallocating
 delete i;
 ```

 *Failure to free memory after being done with it is known as memory leak.*

### Array Allocation

 1. Arrays are allocated using `new` keyword.
 2. Array sizes must be known when allocated.
 3. Array Allocation uses square brackets
 4. Initialization of the array elements happens seperatly from the allocation.
 E.g. 
 ```c++
int *num_list = new int[32];
 ```

### Array 

1. Every deallocation must accompany an allocation.
2. Deallocation occurs using the `delete` keyword
3. Allocation and Deallocation do not have to occur within same scope (not just for arrays)
4. Array deallocation uses the keyword `delete`
5. Array deallocation uses empty square brackets between delete and variable name
6. Allocated elements must be deallocated seperately

E.g.
```c++
//allocation
int *items = new int[3];

//initialization
items[0] = 0;
items[1] = 1;
items[2] = 2;

//deallocation
delete [] items;
```

When allocating for a character array, remember that a pointer is just a space in memory, so we must first clear that memory to be empty so that the end value of the character sequesnce or charater array is null. We use `std::memset` for this initialization of empty character array
```c++
#include <cstring>
constexpr auto MSG_SIZE = 32;

//allocation
char* msg = new char[MSG_SIZE];
//initialization to empty character array
std::memset(msg, 0, MSG_SIZE);

//Add elements to empty array
strcpy(msg, "Three more days until friday");

//deallocating character array
delete [] msg;
```

### Pointer to Pointers

So for example `int**` means a int array (which is itself a pointer) containing as its elements pointers to ints. Therefore for example in our main function we could use either `char* argv[]` or `char** argv`. Both of them are synonymous. When we are deallocating we must not only deallocate the array but its elements as well to prevent a memory leak, as they are pointers too.

Here is an example:
```c++
//allocating for array
int* items[] = new int[3];

//initializing array by allocating and initializing its elements
items[0] = new int(0);
items[1] = new int(1);
items[2] = new int(2);

//deallocate its elements (order does not matter)
delete items[2];
delete items[1];
delete items[0];

//deallocate the actual array
delete [] items;

```

### Ownership of pointers

Make sure to figure out who has the ownership of allocating and then deallocating the pointers.

## Pass By Conventions
    IN VIDEO: Pointers, References And Value Types

C++ has three ways to pass arguments to a function:

1. **Pass By Value:** This is not very efficient, for example if the variable in is going to be passed by value tot he function reverse then it's value must be copied to the stack of reverse. It may be inefficient for large value. E.g. 
    ```c++
    //Method signature of function using Pass by Value
    std::string reverse(std::string in);
    ```

2. **Pass By Pointer:** This is much more efficient as the size of the pointer is anywhere between 16-64 bits depending on the machine architecture. But it is also not the best way, and that is because pointers may be declared but uninitialized, so they MAY point to an address of in-memory data. Therefore if we pass it to a function and then try to dereference it to get the value we might get a `Segmentation Fault` since we are dereferencing a Null Pointer.
    ```c++
    //Method signature of Function using Pass by Pointers 
    int* total_num_of_animals(int* some_number);
    ```

3. **Pass By Reference:** Leads to the best possible solution. A reference is an alias to a pointer. It holds the identity/address of the variable, not its value. And it must exist and be initialized with a correct value, it cannot be null. In fact the main use of references is acting as parameters to support pass-by-reference. When a reference variable is passed into a function, the function works on the original copy (instead of a clone copy in pass-by-value), therefore changes inside the function are reflected outside the function.Here are the benefits of passing by reference as compared to the other two methods:
    * Provides the efficiency of a Pointer because it avoids copying data to a function. Thereby making it an efficient way to pass data to a function.
    * It also avoids  the risks of associated pointers as it cannot be null.

    Here is how you can create a reference to pass to a function:
    ```c++
    //allocating 
    int* num_of_cats = new int(5);

    //declare and initialize a reference
    int& num_of_cats_ref = *i;
    ```

    ```c++
    //Method signature of function usiing pass by reference
    int& num_of_animals(int& some_number);
    ```


## Smart pointers introduced in C++11

    IN VIDEO: Pointers in C++11

### NULL Pointers

Before C++11 we could set the value of a pointer to `NULL`.
In C++03 the `NULL` was defined as typedef of `0`. I.E.
```c++
//definations for NULL
#define NULL 0
typedef 0 NULL;

//assigning 'NULL' to pointers
int* i = NULL;
int* i = 0x0;
int* i = 0;
```
This however caused a problem with type safety, because we could end up with situations like this:
``` c++
int* num = NULL;
int* dec = NULL;

if (num == dec) { //The conditional will return TRUE
    
}
```
Therefore in C++11 we added `nullptr` type and removed the definations for `NULL`. Now that same conditional we saw earlier would fail, I.E.
```c++
int* num = nullptr;
int* dec = nullptr;

if (num == dec) { //The conditional will return FALSE
```

### Newer types of pointers

Because of Memory Leaks, Raw Pointers like those we saw above are discouraged. Instead in C++11 we have had some new additions.

1. `unique_ptr`: When the pointer goes out of **scope** then it will automatically be garbage collected and deallocated. E.g.
    ```c++
    void my_func() {

        std::unique_ptr<int> num = std::unique_ptr<int>( new int(5) );
        //Some code

        return;
        // No Memory leaks
    }
    ```
    Here are it's properties:
    - Strictly owns the memory
    - Ownership can be transfered to the caller
    - Releases memory when out of scope
    - Can be returned from a function (transfer of ownership)
    - Copying is not permitted
    - `#include <memory>`

2. `shared_ptr`: Uses **reference counting** to deallocate the pointer when no longer in use. When using this we do not need to dereference the pointer to get its value.

    ```c++
        void my_func() {
            auto ps = std::shared_ptr<std::string>( new std::string );
        }
    ```

    Here are its properties:
    * No strict ownership, ownership is shared
    * "Last one out, turns out the lights"
    * Uses reference counting
    * Increases the refcount when sharing occurs
    * Decreases the refcount when shared instance is destroyed
    * When shared count is zero, resource/memory is released
    * `#include <memory>`
    * Copying is allowed